---
title: "Unraveling the Decline of Brahma Worship in India: Factors, Appropriation, and Demise"
image: "https://images.unsplash.com/photo-1616123728613-8fd096e1bcf9?crop=entropy&cs=tinysrgb&fit=max&fm=jpg&ixid=M3wxMTc3M3wwfDF8c2VhcmNofDF8fGJyYWhtYXxlbnwwfHx8fDE2ODc2NDIyMjF8MA&ixlib=rb-4.0.3&q=80&w=2000"
date: 2023-06-26T03:03:00+05:30 	
author: "Siddhesh N"
tags: ["Lord Brahma"]
draft: true 
---


Brahma, the Supreme God, was highly worshipped in ancient India. Prominent figures like Raavan, Hiranyakashyap, Mahisasur, Kaushiki, and Bharadwaj were devout followers of Brahma. However, the worship of Brahma abruptly declined with the rise of Buddhism and Jainism. Several factors contributed to the emergence of Shaivism and Vaishnavism in India. 

What did the followers of Vishnu and Shiva propagate that led to the end of Brahma worship, which had persisted for over 5000 years or more? It is a well-documented fact that the major Hindu gods worshipped today, such as Vishnu's avatars like Ram and Krishna, and Shiva, were relatively unknown before the advent of Buddhism.

Before Buddhism and Jainism gained prominence, Brahma was revered by Hindus as the primary Supreme God responsible for creating the universe and everything within it. Indra, Agni, Surya, Chandra (Som), and Vayu were worshipped as Brahma's descendants. Brahma was also associated with creating order (Dharma/Yama), time (Kaal), and determining the destiny (Bhagya Vidhata, Vidhi's Vidhata) of all living beings. He was credited with creating speech (Vachaspati/Vaageeshwari, also known as Saraswati), the seven musical notes, and the seven constellations (Saptarshis), among other things. The Vedas, Upanishads, Shastras, and even some Puranas regarded Brahma as the self-born golden egg (Swayambhu, Hiranyagarbha) and the one who spoke the first syllable, Om, hence also known as Brahmakshar. Brahma's first abode was water, and he was referred to as Narayan. He was considered the Father figure (Prajapati, Pitamah, Parampita, Purush) of both tangible and intangible aspects. Prominent figures in Hinduism, such as Manu (the first human), Shatarupa (the first woman), and even Narada, were believed to be descendants of Brahma. His original five heads represented the Panch Mahabhutas/Mahatatvas: Fire (Agni), Air (Vayu), Water (Jal), Sky (Akash), and Earth (Bhudevi/Prithvi). Brahma was recognized as the creator of the four Vedas and the four varnas. Alongside Agni and Indra, he presided over Yagna, the sacrificial ritual. While Brahma worship is prevalent in the stories of Ramayana, Puranas, and Mahabharata, it was not in the form of idols.

Brahma played a significant role in saving the world during the Ice Age, appearing in the form of the fish (Matsya avatar). When the world was submerged in a dark ocean, Brahma took the form of a wild boar (Varaha avatar) and rescued it from drowning. During that era, terms like Brahm, Brahma, Braahm, Brahman, and Parabrahm had the same meaning, but they were intentionally altered to fit the narratives established by Vaishnavites, Shaivites, and others. Another popular name for Brahma was Sat/Satya, which is why Brahma Lok was also known as Satya/Sat Lok, and the age of Brahma worship was referred to as Satya/Sat Yug. In fact, the modern-day Satya Narayan worship is essentially the formless worship of Brahma, as both names referred to Brahma rather than Vishnu.

Many Hindus are unaware that the traditions of Prajapatya marriage and Sraddha ceremony originated from Brahma worship prevalent before the Buddhist era. However, Buddhism and Jainism posed a challenge to the predominant position of Brahma. Buddhists considered Buddha as a form of Brahma and adopted symbols like the lotus and Dharmachakra associated with Brahma. Similarly, Jains also regarded Brahma as their primary ancestor. However, both of these schools were atheistic and questioned the significance of Yagnas. The philosophical concept of Moksha (salvation) gained popularity, and religious scholars propagated that worshipping Brahma could not guarantee salvation since he was responsible for creating the world, which Buddhists, Jains, Shaivites, and some Vaishnavites considered the root cause of all sorrows and troubles. Even today, many countries with a Buddhist majority worship Brahma as the principal Supreme God. However, after the decline of Buddhism and Jainism, the followers of Brahma faced new challenges with the increasing popularity of Vishnu and Shiva, supported by most of the former royal kingdoms.

Vaishnavites propagated the notion that Vishnu created Brahma, and the same creation story was manipulated by Shaivites. According to Shaivites, it was Shiva who created Brahma, not the other way around. According to both sects, only Vishnu or Shiva, but not Brahma, could grant Moksha since Brahma already determined the destiny of beings before time. Vaishnavites appropriated attributes like the three incarnations (Matsya, Kurma, Varaha), the word Narayan, and Vishwaroop mentioned in the Bhagavad Gita, gradually associating them with Vishnu. They also emphasized the concept of a personalized superhero-like God, representing the ideal husband, man, wife, mother, lover, son, savior, and hero, who would protect humanity from danger. This shift compelled the worshippers of the impersonal (abstract) Brahma to transition towards worshipping personalized deities. The followers of Brahma struggled to provide philosophical answers to the superhero-like gods who battled evil forces and rescued people from suffering. Moreover, Brahma was often blamed for worldly miseries, referred to as the "Ocean of all causes." The ruling kings and social classes increasingly propagated the supremacy of Vishnu and Shiva, fabricating stories in the Puranas to discourage Brahma worship. One such malicious story portrayed Brahma's infatuation with Saraswati and Shatarupa, questioning his worthiness of worship. The false narrative of Shiva severing Brahma's fifth head serves as an example of deliberate mischief to demoralize Brahma worshippers.

Nonetheless, the remaining followers of Brahma made a last-ditch effort to establish the cult of Trimurti, granting Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva co-equal status with their respective roles in creation, preservation, and destruction. A new God named Dattatreya was popularized as the son of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. However, this cult did not endure since the concept of Brahma's determinism, impersonal (abstract) nature, contradicted the personalized nature of Vishnu and Shiva, as advocated by Vaishnavites and Shaivites. In later years, the role of Brahma was further diminished by Shaktism, which depicted Brahma as the elder son of Shakti rather than her creator. Vishnu and Shiva were portrayed as her second and third sons, respectively. While the Shastras, Vedas, and Puranas explicitly state that Brahma was self-born and not created by anyone, the later interpolations failed to bury these facts but ultimately led to the termination of Brahma worship in India. Therefore, appropriation, defamation, interpolation, distortion, and subtraction were the five methods employed by Vaishnavites, Shaivites, Buddhists, and Jains in the past to demote and ultimately end the worship of the once Supreme God, Brahma.